---
title: About
layout: about
permalink: /about.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
credits: false
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---

{% include feature/jumbotron.html objectid="ross01" %}

{% include feature/nav-menu.html sections="Description;Transcript;Links;Acknowledgments;References" %}

## Authors

Rosario Iozzia, Gabriel Tamburro, Anthony Del Rosario

## Guests

- Dr. Enrico Moretto, History Professor
  
- Rob Martin, Rockstar Games Employee, Former Ubisoft Employee

## Description

Have you ever played a video game that took place any time in the past? In our experience, playing these games always leave us with a feeling of better knowing some element of the past that the game takes place in. But how much is that feeling justified? Are we learning anything when we play games with names, places, and events based on history?  
In this episode of the Krumplecast, we explore how much we can learn from historic video games, using Ubisoft's *Assassin's Creed* franchise as the main point of discussion. Through our interviews with a history professor and a former Ubisoft employee, we find the limits these games have as educational tools.

## Transcript

Imagine your tired arms clasping the edges of the smooth limestone surface of the great Pyramid of Giza, the wind whipping your hair around the view of the entire bustling city of Cairo in 49 BCE being a sight to behold. Now imagine sneaking in the shadows of the vibrant city of Constantinople. In the 16th century, smelling the fragrant sense of the markets, scaling the impressive. Texture. This is only a slice of what you could experience with the Assassin's Creed games. Hello and welcome to the crumple cast Assassin's Creed special feature. My name is Gabriel and today I am accompanied by my co-host Ross. Hello everyone and Anthony hi. Every. We are all students of the history 4840 public history course. We have sifted through the scholarship on a mission to seek answers to the following question. How is Assassin's Creed an example of the ways we can learn from historic video games? But before we can answer that, I think we should get you guys up to speed about what Assassin's Creed is. So take it away, Anthony. Yeah. Thank you, Gabriel. So Assassin's Creed is a video game franchise that began in 2007, developed by a French company named Ubisoft is described as a historical action adventure game where the goal of the player is to sneak around different urban environments, assassinating the enemy without being caught. Each game gives you a different character to play in a different time in history, so there really is something for everyone. But in the last seven years, the Assassin's Creed games have morphed from what they were before from a simple stealth based action game to an entire historical simulation with RPG elements in open world and hundreds of hours of gameplay. It's fascinating, truly. I think the fact that these games are way bigger in scale now gives Ubisoft more opportunities to evolve this franchise for being just a game to an accurate and fun tool for learning. What do you think Gabriel? Yeah, definitely. And I think a thesis by Brian Erickson brings up a great point on this. And to paraphrase the fact that video games as a medium of entertainment are not going anywhere anytime soon, gives them potential to become an anchor for scholars in the digital era by creating new ways to study, educate, and play with the past. Ohh yeah, imagine getting assigned to play video games as your homework. That would be awesome, especially since Assassin's Creed is so rich with details that you would be learning crucial information just the same, albeit in a different manner than simply reading an article or even watching a. Video it really is the interactive element of video games that set it apart from any other medium and to speak more about this learning element is our first. Interviewee Enrico Moretto, who's a professor of history at York University and teaches the video games and history course. So let's roll that clip. One of the big changes as we went from basically having an industry, an academic industry that pumped out violence related papers about video games to one that now puts at a pretty, pretty diverse array and scholarship, definitely, definitely much richer than it used to be. I know, like Elissa Goldstein, Stephen Wall talks a lot about like she works on. On I believe Caribbean history and talks a lot about using games to talk about Caribbean history, so things like Assassin's Creed Black Flag or Freedom Cry and. Particular so just like the the the artistic value and stuff has come to change over the last 15 years, the technology of games has come to change. The research has massively and you can you can basically now actually make a book or write a career out of video games. Yeah, I think this is a good point brought up by the professor now. Ross, I heard you have a personal story to share about the Assassin's Creed games, so if you could just explain that a little bit to all of us. Yeah, for sure. I remember as a kid, maybe 10-11 years old, always going to my neighbor's house to play the Assassin's Creed and Civilization games, and they both really ignited my passion for history as a whole. Learning about all these places, names and empires and actually being able to play as them was something that really blew my mind. I think my story opens up a wider discussion about Assassin's Creed being a valid entry point for people who have a broad interest in history but are too afraid or may be intimidated to dive into academic books or to take a course in. I agree with you 100% and this also plays into the idea of historical enthusiasm and gaming. And who better to discuss this than Professor Moretto? So one of my worries is almost like you'll get someone who shows up, who has all of the enthusiasm, but maybe has a very narrow view of the topic because you know, they've just played the video game or whatever, right. I do think, though, that this is outweighed by that enthusiasm. I can work with enthusiasm. Can't work with someone who's not interested in the period that they're studying. I can't work with someone who's like. Like I know, OK, I'm just kind of a credit or whatever and it's like, OK, well then it's your own skill that will decide that because we're not really able to teach you. Very much if. You don't want to learn if these games can create enthusiasm for all of these different periods, then we can work with that. I don't just mean historians. I mean like anyone who wants to try and create an interest in history can work with that. Museum folk right can be like, OK, there's been a lot of buzz about, you know, Renaissance Italy from Assassin's Creed two. Maybe we can we can do something with that. We can use that in our advertising. We can use that in our exhibit. With whatever it might be, they'll come interested because they know what we're putting on is going to relate to this topic. Well, all this talk about using Assassin's Creed as an entry point into history and the potential of using the game as a teaching tool is completely null and void unless the information in these games are accurate. How can you make sure that Assassin's Creed is giving us an accurate representation of the past? That is a fair point to consider. I've analyzed various sources such as the one by Aris Polytopia Los that all say that the development team behind Assassin's Creed Works diligently with historians in order to convey accuracy. Oh, maybe you're. Who's on the phone run a podcast right now. Calling. Yeah. Ohh, wait, it's former Ubisoft employee Rob. Martin, perfect timing. Hello, rob. Hello. Rob, can you give us an example about the diligence of the development team behind Assassin's Creed and making sure the historical information is accurate? Notre Dame, the church in Paris burnt down and one of the ways that they were able to rebuild it was by using scans that Ubisoft did of the interior for Assassin's Creed Unity. So we had access. We had gone over there when we were making Assassin's Creed Unity, and we had scanned the inside and we had built a pretty authentic representation of Notre Dame. For the game, so we are able to provide the government with a ton of assets that actually helped them rebuild that accurately, which was. All of this culminates and what I think is the coolest part about the last three Assassin's Creed games. The Discovery Tour mode I forgot about that. Yeah, the Discovery Tour gives players an opportunity to explore these virtual environments like you were in a museum. I said in Predin Pordon's article. This mode features interactive exhibits. And digital models of cities that no longer exist. So far, they have done ancient Egypt, classical Greece and England at the time of the Vikings. And I would even say that Ubisoft adding this experience tells us how the goal behind these games has changed so much over time. Going from a simple assassination game to a much more full historical experience that we can learn and enjoy. Rob, if you're still on the line, what are your thoughts about the Discovery Tour? They offered a museum mode, which essentially removed any of the gameplay or Assassin's Creed gameplay elements from the environment and let you go through those places and explore Egypt just as a tourist during that time period. But I mean, what a great, great way to to teach a history lesson. I mean, how cool is that? I couldn't imagine what it would be like. You know, when I was in school to be like, hey, you know, we're doing a segment on on ancient. Egypt. Well, once you go. Home and run around in Assassin's Creed for a while and see what you learned. It was filled with little notes and things you can find and it taught you sort of about about the way of life back then. So I mean those those are great examples of ways in which video games as a medium cannot just be entertaining but can also contribute back to the world or to non gamers. That's really interesting gameplay feature, but I read an article by Richard Cole discussing the idea of techno culture mashups. He mentions that this method is more of a combination of interpretations that make an original experience. How does this affect how authentic the content of these games is? And that is a very fair question. However, Ronald Way helps us to understand the relationship between perfect accuracy and the experience of authenticity in his discussion of reconstructed heritage sites, way says that, and I quote, the objective has been achieved if the reconstructed site inspires in the beholder, a sense of the past of feeling. Impossible of analysis, but very real nevertheless. So does that mean that even if it's not perfect, these experiences bring us historical value? I was. So. Looks like we're out of time. So did we answer the question? Have we shown how Assassin's Creed is an example of the ways we can learn from historic video games? Yes, but to a certain extent the learning elements of the Assassin's Creed games are definitely valuable. However, they are limited to how much they can tell us beyond an entry point. To being educated about a specific historical period, both of our interviewees mentioned that at the end of the day these are video games and the main goal is to be entertained with the history aspect. As a bonus. All this together says that the Assassin's Creed games are a great way to start game. People familiar with history, as shown with the diligent development team and the Discovery Tour feature. However, there are limits when trying to portray something historical as completely accurate. Like emphasized in the concept of techno cultural mashups. The experience of history that video games. Offer whether or not it is perfectly accurate means that countless people in the future, just like me, will be inspired to pursue history further. Thank you for tuning in to the crumple cast, Assassin's Creed Special feature now, enough talking. It's time to play some Assassin's Creed.


## Links
The following links and resources were referred to in in the podcast audio:

1. This podcast was based on the Assassin's Creed video game franchise. More information can be found on the [Ubisoft Official Website](https://www.ubisoft.com/en-ca/game/assassins-creed)
2. For a detailed walkthrough of the Discovery Tour as featured in the game Assassin's Creed Origins, please check out the following [YouTube video link](https://youtu.be/Dv0eK6PZzoU)

## Acknowledgments

The creators would like to acknowledge assistance and support from:

- The York University Libraries' [Making & Media Creation Lab](https://www.library.yorku.ca/ds/)

## References

Cole, Richard. “Mashing Up History and Heritage in Assassin’s Creed Odyssey.” *Games and Culture* 17, no. 6 (2022): 915–28. [https://doi.org/10.1177/15554120221115403](https://doi.org/10.1177/15554120221115403).

Erickson, Brian T. “PLAYING WITH THE PAST: THE IMPORTANCE OF HISTORICAL VIDEO GAMES FOR THE FIELD OF HISTORY”, 2023. [https://uh-ir.tdl.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/9c5344c7-bccb-45e2-bbcf-8af43d2a6610/content](https://uh-ir.tdl.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/9c5344c7-bccb-45e2-bbcf-8af43d2a6610/content).

 Poiron, Perrine. “Assassin’s Creed Origins Discovery Tour.” *Near Eastern Archaeology* 84, no. 1 (2021): 79–85. [https://doi.org/10.1086/712580](https://doi.org/10.1086/712580).

Politopoulos, Aris, Angus A.A Mol, Krijn H.J Boom, and Csilla E Ariese. “History Is Our Playground: Action and Authenticity in Assassin’s Creed: Odyssey.” *Advances in Archaeological Practice* 7, no. 3 (2019): 317–23. [https://doi.org/10.1017/aap.2019.30](https://doi.org/10.1017/aap.2019.30). 

Ubisoft. Assassin’s Creed Odyssey. Ubisoft Montreal, Ubisoft Quebec. Xbox Series S. 2018.

Ubisoft. Assassin’s Creed Valhalla. Ubisoft Montreal. Xbox Series S. 2020.

